# 5 Reading Latin: working with words and sentences


To round off your work on sentences, you should now revisit The Open University’s [Introducing Classical Latin](http://www.open.ac.uk/Arts/introducing-classical-latin/) website. In <a xmlns:str="http://exslt.org/strings" href="">Section 3.2</a>, you were asked to work through the ‘Sounds’ section and, if you had time, to begin looking through the ‘Words’ section.


### Activity 13


#### Question

Now finish working through the ‘ [Words](http://www.open.ac.uk/Arts/introducing-classical-latin/) ’ section of the Introducing Classical Latin site. Once you are confident that you have a reasonable grasp of the 24 Latin words you are asked to learn, work through the ‘ [Sentences](http://www.open.ac.uk/Arts/introducing-classical-latin/) ’ section, looking at [ ‘Using Nouns 1', ‘Using Nouns 2’ and ‘Using Adjectives’ ](http://www.open.ac.uk/Arts/introducing-classical-latin/). The activities on this website will give you the opportunity to translate some basic Latin sentences. As you work through the exercises, you will also begin to see how the learning you have done in this course relates to the practicalities of reading and understanding Latin.

Aim to set aside around 2 hours to work through the ‘Words’ and ‘Sentences’ sections. Once more, in line with the ‘little and often’ approach you are advised to adopt for learning Latin, you may wish to break down your time working on these sections into small chunks of 10−20 minutes.




## 5.1 The cases in Latin


To finish off your study of ‘Getting Started on Classical Latin’, let’s take a brief look at a key feature of Latin grammar: ‘cases’.

‘Cases’ indicate the various functions that nouns, pronouns and adjectives can have in a sentence. The case is shown by the word ending in Latin.

During your work on the [Introducing Classical Latin](http://www.open.ac.uk/Arts/introducing-classical-latin/) website, you met the two most important cases in Latin. These are the __nominative__ case (i.e. the subject forms, like servus and femina) and the __accusative__ case (i.e. the object forms, like serv __um__ and femin __am__).


---

5.1.2 Nominative: the case of the subject
The __nominative__ is the form of the noun you will find in a dictionary. This is the form of the noun that is used for the __subject__ of the sentence.

* __femina__ aurum amat. __The woman__ loves gold.

* __servus__ forum videt. __The slave__ sees the forum.

The nominative is also used for what is known as the __complement__, usually a word linked to the subject of a sentence by the verb ‘to be’.

* femina est __regina__. The woman is a __queen__.

(Note that in this sentence, woman – femina – is also in the nominative since it is the subject of the sentence. One way to think of the verb ‘to be’ is as an equals sign, linking the two nouns: femina = regina.)


---

5.1.3 Accusative: the case of the object
The __accusative__ case is the form of the noun used for the __object__ of the sentence.

* servus __feminam__ amat. The slave loves __the woman__.

* puer __lupum__ capit. The boy captures the __wolf__.

The accusative is also used after certain __prepositions__ in Latin (such as __ad__, ‘towards’).

* puer __ad feminam__ currit. The boy runs __towards the woman__.


---

5.1.4 Summary of cases
Table 8 below summarises the uses of the nominative, accusative and the other four cases in Latin. There is no need to commit this to memory now: this is simply here to provide an overview of how Latin nouns work.

Note how the ending of a Latin noun like servus, ‘slave’, changes in the various cases (serv __us__, serv __um__, serv __i__, etc.). Importantly, whereas English speakers rely on __word order__ to tell them what grammatical role a word is playing in the sentence, readers of Latin principally rely on __word shape__.
<table xmlns:str="http://exslt.org/strings">
<caption>Table 8 Summary of the cases in Latin</caption>
<tbody>
<tr>
<th>case</th>
<th>use</th>
<th>English translation ('slave')</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">nominative 
 (servus)</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">
used for the subject of a sentence or clause

used for the complement of the verb ‘to be’ (i.e. after the verb ‘to be’)
</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">a slave …, the slave …</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">vocative 
 (serve)</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">used when addressing someone</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">slave!, … O slave,</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">accusative 
 (servum)</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">used for the object of a verb 
 used after certain prepositions</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">… a slave, … the slave 
 (meaning of preposition) + the slave/a slave</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">genitive 
 (servi)</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">used to indicate possession: of, ______’s</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">of the slave, of a slave; the slave’s, a slave’s</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">dative 
 (servo)</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">used with verbs of giving, saying, showing or telling: to, for</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">to the slave, to a slave; for the slave, for a slave</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">ablative 
 (servo)</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">when used by itself (usually with things rather than people): by, with, from 
 used after certain prepositions</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">by, with, from (whichever seems to fit) + the thing 
 (meaning of preposition) + the slave/a slave</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Note that Latin has no word for ‘a’ or ‘the’. This means that you can choose to translate the different forms of servus as ‘slave’, ‘a slave’ or ‘the slave’, whichever seems to make best sense in context.

