# 4 Introducing grammar


The grammar of a language is simply a way of describing the rules its native speakers intuitively use when they speak or write. In this section, you will explore some aspects of English grammar that it will be useful for you to be aware of when studying Latin. As someone who has already mastered one complex language that is related to Latin – namely English – you may be pleasantly surprised at how familiar some of the principles of Latin grammar turn out to be.


## 4.1 Inflection


The underlying grammatical rules of Indo-European languages (for example, English, Gaelic, French, German, Russian, Latin, Greek, Punjabi) are similar, but it is not always easy to appreciate this when you are beginning to learn a new language. A common feature of all these languages is the ‘ __inflection__ ’ of nouns, adjectives and verbs, whereby the end of the word is changed according to its function in the sentence. For example, __woman__, __woman’s__, __women__ and __women’s__ are all inflections of a noun. __This__ and __these__ are inflections of an adjective, and __teach__, __teaches__, __teaching__ and __taught__ are inflections of a verb.

Modern English uses inflected forms in a fairly limited way. But many languages use them much more than English does – including Latin which is a heavily inflected language. In English, we have, on the whole, exchanged the inflections for a very strict system of word order. For example, ‘Those girls are feeding the horses’ means one thing and ‘The horses are feeding those girls’ means something rather different. Similarly, ‘You are going to Spain tomorrow’ is different from ‘Are you going to Spain tomorrow?’ We can tell who is doing what to whom, in the first example, and whether something is a statement or a question, in the second example, from the order of the words.

This is much less true of Latin. The endings of words (the inflections) are vital to understanding how words relate to each other and enable us to work out the meaning of a sentence. When learning Latin (or Greek, German or Russian), we have to change our reading habits. We need to look even more carefully at the ends of words than at the beginnings, and only if we do this will the meaning of a sentence become clear and unambiguous. In learning Latin, vocabulary is important, but just as important is the system of word endings.


## 4.2 Parts of speech


In describing the grammar of written Latin, the best method is to use the traditional classical grammar, as worked out by the Greeks and Romans themselves. As a preliminary exercise, it may be useful to be familiar with the ‘parts of speech’ in English.

Table 4 below gives a very brief explanation of the eight parts of speech which are found in both Latin and English. A fuller discussion of the most important terms follows.
<table xmlns:str="http://exslt.org/strings">
<caption>Table 4 Parts of speech in English</caption>
<tbody>
<tr>
<th>Part of speech</th>
<th>Explanation</th>
<th>__Latin derivation of the term__</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">noun</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">a naming word</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">nomen, a name</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">pronoun</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">a word used in place of a noun</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">pro, instead of; nomen, a name</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">adjective</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">a 'describing' word</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">adiectum, thrown at, added</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">verb</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">a 'doing' or 'being' word</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">verbum, a word</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">adverb</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">a word added to a verb, adjective or another adverb</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">ad, to; verbum, a word</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">preposition</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">a word placed before a noun or pronoun</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">prae, in front of; positum, placed</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">conjunction</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">a joining word</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">coniunctum, joined</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">interjection</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">an exclamation</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">interiectum, thrown between, insert</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>


---

4.2.1 Nouns
__Nouns__ are used to name people, places, things or concepts; for example __Cicero__, __Italy__, __field__, __happiness__. Most nouns can be singular or plural; for example __field__, __fields__.

In Latin, nouns are usually subject to inflections: their endings change. This is sometimes so in English, too, as you saw in <a xmlns:str="http://exslt.org/strings" href="">Section 4.1</a> with woman, women, woman’s, and women’s.


### Activity 5


#### Question

Identify the nouns in this passage from Beatrix Potter’s *The Tale of Peter Rabbit*.

<!--Quote id=-->
>Once upon a time there were four little Rabbits, and their names were – Flopsy, Mopsy, Cotton-tail, and Peter. They lived with their Mother in a sand-bank, underneath the root of a very big fir-tree.
>‘Now, my dears,’ said old Mrs. Rabbit one morning, ‘you may go into the fields or down the lane, but don’t go into Mr. McGregor’s garden: your Father had an accident there; he was put in a pie by Mrs. McGregor.* Potter, 1902, pp. 7–11 [link]()




#### Answer

time, Rabbits, names, Flopsy, Mopsy, Cotton-tail, Peter, Mother, sand-bank, root, fir-tree, dears, Rabbit, morning, fields, lane, McGregor’s, garden, Father, accident, pie, McGregor




---



### Gender of nouns

In English, we tend to classify nouns according to their sex, ‘masculine’ being used of males, ‘feminine’ of females and ‘neuter’ of everything else. Observe the following examples:

* What’s wrong with that __man__ ? __He__ seems really annoyed.

* I saw you speaking to that __woman__. What did __she__ say?

* You had the __book__ in your hand just now. Where did you put __it__ ?

‘He’ tends to be used for male humans and animals; ‘she’ tends to be used for female humans and animals; and ‘it’ is used for inanimate objects and animals of indeterminate gender.

In Latin, however, nouns are classiﬁed according to their gender, and the terms ‘masculine’ and ‘feminine’ are not restricted to male and female people and animals.

So, some __masculine__ nouns identify people or animals that you might intuitively class as ‘masculine’, such as:

* vir, man

* miles, soldier

* servus, (male) slave

* lupus, (he-)wolf

But a number of inanimate objects or concepts are also masculine in Latin:

* campus, ﬁeld

* murus, wall

* pons, bridge

* annus, year

Similarly, some __feminine__ nouns identify people or animals that you might intuitively class as ‘feminine’, such as:

* femina, woman

* regina, queen

* uxor, wife

* lupa, she-wolf

But many inanimate objects or concepts are also feminine in Latin:

* ﬂamma, ﬂame

* statua, statue

* urbs, city

* arx, citadel

In addition to masculine and feminine, Latin also has a third gender: __neuter__. Neuter nouns include:

* templum, temple

* bellum, war

* consilium, plan

* nomen, name

If you are new to language learning (and even if you are not!), the idea of gender may be challenging to grasp. There is, after all, nothing intrinsically masculine about a ‘year’ or feminine about a ‘ﬂame’. Rest assured that gender is something that you will get used to over time, however.


---



---

4.2.2 Pronouns
Pronouns are used to avoid repeating nouns and to supply the subjects for verbs. __I__, __me__, __we__ and __us__ are known as the first person pronouns; __you__ is the second person pronoun; and __he__, __him__, __she__, __her__, __it__, __they__ and __them__ are third person pronouns in English. In Latin, pronouns are used only when really necessary for the sense of a sentence, or sometimes for emphasis. Often, a pronoun subject, such as __I__, __you__ or __she__, can be understood from the ending of the verb. __This__ and __that__ can also be used as pronouns, both in English and in Latin.


---

4.2.3 Adjectives
Adjectives are words which describe nouns, for example __big__ city, __these__ chairs, __good__ people, __my__ chocolate or __swift__ horse. In Latin they ‘agree’ with the noun they describe: that is to say, they match with regard to gender (masculine, feminine or neuter) and number (singular or plural), for example. This is occasionally so in English, too. For example, we say __that__ house but __those__ houses.


---

4.2.4 Prepositions
A preposition is a word which accompanies a noun (or a pronoun) to provide information such as the location of the action of a sentence in space or time, e.g. __in__, __towards__, __against__, __with__, __among__, __from__, __after__, __about__.

Prepositions are always used with a noun or pronoun in what is called a ‘prepositional phrase’, for example: __towards the woman__, __near the cinema__, __behind the clouds__, __after breakfast__, __with her__.

Notice how English says: ‘This is __for____him__ ’ (not ‘for he’); ‘He went __with____me__ ’ (not ‘with I’) and ‘Give the sweets __to____us__ ’ (not ‘to we’). That is to say, English tends to use a particular form of a pronoun when it is used in a prepositional phrase. In Latin, it is not just the forms of pronouns that change when they are used with prepositions: the forms of nouns change, too. The Latin for ‘slave’, for example, is __servus__ ; but ‘with the slave’ in Latin is __cum servo__ (i.e. the final – __us__ of servus has changed to – __o__).


---

4.2.5 Verbs
Verbs are the most important words of all, as is suggested by the fact that the verb in both English and Latin is named after the Latin word verbum, word! Without a verb, a sentence cannot be a proper sentence, or a clause a proper clause. A one-word sentence consists of a verb only, for example, ‘Run!’


---



### Verb endings

The ending of a Latin verb shows who is carrying out the action of the verb (which is why there is usually no need for a pronoun to show this). Table 5 below shows the present tense person endings of almost every Latin verb.
<table xmlns:str="http://exslt.org/strings">
<caption> Table 5 Person endings of Latin verbs (present tense) </caption>
<tbody>
<tr>
<th>Person</th>
<th>Singular</th>
<th>Plural</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">1st</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">__o__ (= I)</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">__mus__ (= we)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">2nd</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">__s__ (= you)</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">__tis__ (= you)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">3rd</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">__t__ (= he/she/it)</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">__nt__ (= they)</td>
</tr>
<tr><td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="3">
The part of the verb to which the person ending is added is called the stem. Thus, the stem __ama__ plus the person ending – __t__ produces __amat__, ‘he/she/it loves’. Alternatively, __ama__ plus ­ __nt__ produces __amant__, meaning ‘they love.’
</td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>


### Activity 6


#### Question

Identify the person (1st, 2nd, 3rd) and number (singular or plural) of the following English verbs. Type your answers in the box below.
 He loves: 
 They capture: 
 She carries: 
 You desire: 
 I fear: 
 We see: 
 They are: 
 I carry: 

#### Answer
<table xmlns:str="http://exslt.org/strings">
<caption></caption>
<tbody>
<tr>
<th>Example</th>
<th>person and number</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">He loves</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">3rd singular</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">They capture</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">3rd plural</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">She carries</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">3rd singular</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">You desire</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">2nd singular or plural (depending on whether ‘you’ refers to one person or more than one people)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">I fear</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">1st singular</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">We see</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">1st plural</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">They are</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">3rd plural</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">I carry</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">1st singular</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>




---



---



### The tense of verbs

As well as indicating an action, and who is carrying it out, a verb usually tells us __when__ the action happens: __I’m eating__, for example, tells us of something happening at the present moment, whereas __I ate__ indicates something that happened in the past. This kind of difference is known as the ‘ __tense__ ’ of the verb. In English, this is often indicated by using another verb to help out the meaning, for example __ I *will* eat __. This extra verb is sometimes referred to as an ‘auxiliary verb’, from the Latin word __auxilium__, meaning ‘help’. In Latin, on the other hand, a change of person ending, and sometimes a change of stem, indicates a change in the tense.

The main tenses in Latin are given in Table 6 below.
<table xmlns:str="http://exslt.org/strings">
<caption>Table 6 The main tenses in Latin</caption>
<tbody>
<tr>
<th>Tense</th>
<th>Latin</th>
<th>English translations</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">Present</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">porto</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">I carry (simple present) 
 I am carrying (present continuous) 
 I do carry (emphatic)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">Future</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">portabo</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">I shall/will carry 
 I am going to carry</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">Imperfect</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">portabam</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">I was carrying (continuous action in the past) 
 I used to carry (repeated action) 
 I carried (repeated action)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">Perfect</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">portavi</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">I have carried (present perfect) 
 I carried (past simple: a completed action)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">Pluperfect</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">portaveram</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">I had carried (further back in the past than the perfect)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">Future perfect</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">portavero</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">I will/shall have eaten</td>
</tr>
<tr><td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="3">
You will note that ‘I carried’ is a possible English translation of both the imperfect and the perfect.
</td></tr>
<tr><td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="3">
Latin would use the __imperfect__ (portabam), from Latin __imperfectum__, ‘incomplete’, when the action was __continuing__ or __repeated__: e.g. ‘I carried my books to school every day’.
</td></tr>
<tr><td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="3">
Latin would use the __perfect__ (portavi), from Latin __perfectum__, ‘complete’, for a __one-off__ action: e.g. ‘I carried my books to school on Tuesday’.
</td></tr>
<tr><td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="3">
Latin has only the above six tenses. As you can see from the translations provided, there are not as many different ways of describing actions in Latin as there are in English!
</td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>


### Activity 7


#### Question

Identify the Latin tense – present, imperfect, perfect or pluperfect – that would be used to translate the following English verbs. Then identify the person and number of each (e.g. first person singular; third person plural). Type your answers in the box provided.
 You speak: 
 They have arrived: 
 We used to know: 
 We went: 
 You are flying: 
 I was trying: 
 He had jumped: 
 She fell: 

#### Answer
<table xmlns:str="http://exslt.org/strings">
<caption></caption>
<tbody>
<tr>
<th>Example</th>
<th>Person and tense</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">You speak</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">present tense, 2nd person</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">They have arrived</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">perfect tense, 3rd person plural</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">We used to know</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">imperfect tense, 1st person plural</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">We went</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">perfect tense or imperfect tense (depending whether it is a completed or repeated action), 1st person plural</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">You are flying</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">present tense, 2nd person</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">I was trying</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">imperfect tense, 1st person singular</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">He had jumped</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">pluperfect tense, 3rd person singular</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">She fell</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">perfect tense (depending whether it is a completed or repeated action), 3rd person singular</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>




### Activity 8


#### Question

The following extract from the Parable of the Prodigal Son in the New Testament contains several verbs. Identify each of the verbs and say which tense would be used to translate them into Latin (present, future, imperfect, perfect or pluperfect). Type your answers in the box provided.

<!--Quote id=-->
>‘And when he had spent everything, a great famine arose in that country, and he began to be in want. So he went and joined himself to one of the citizens of that country... no one gave him anything. But when he came to himself he said, ‘How many of my father’s hired servants have bread enough and to spare, but I perish here with hunger! I will arise and go to my father, and I will say to him, ‘Father, I have sinned against heaven and before you …’* (Luke 15: 14–18) [link]()




#### Answer
<table xmlns:str="http://exslt.org/strings">
<caption></caption>
<tbody>
<tr>
<th>Verbs</th>
<th>Tense</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">had spent</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">pluperfect tense</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">arose</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">perfect tense</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">began</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">perfect tense</td>
</tr>
<tr><td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="2">[‘to be’ is also a form of verb: an ‘infinitive’]</td></tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">went</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">perfect tense</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">joined</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">perfect tense</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">gave</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">imperfect tense (since the action was habitual: he kept not being given anything)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">came</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">perfect tense</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">said</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">perfect tense</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">have</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">present tense</td>
</tr>
<tr><td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="2">[‘to spare’ is also a form of verb: an ‘infinitive’]</td></tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">perish</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">present tense</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">will arise</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">future tense</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">(will) go</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">future tense</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">will say</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">future tense</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">have sinned</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">perfect tense</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>




---



---

4.2.6 Other parts of speech
Nouns, adjectives, verbs, pronouns and prepositions are the most important parts of speech to get to grips with as you start to learn Latin.

If you would like to know more about the other parts of speech – adverbs, conjunctions and interjections – you can look these up in the <a xmlns:str="http://exslt.org/strings" href="">glossary</a>, which you will find towards the end of this unit.


## 4.3 Sentences


In this section, you will take a closer look at sentences, in particular the concepts of ‘subject’ and ‘object’ which are so vital for understanding Latin.


---

4.3.1 Subject and verb
A sentence consists of a number of words which, to make sense, must include a verb. Unless this is the only word in the sentence (as in ‘Run!’), there will normally be a word telling us who or what is doing the action. This person or thing carrying out the action of the verb – which is denoted by a noun or a pronoun – is called the __subject__ of the verb.

Consider these sentences:

<!--Quote id=-->
>The players ran onto the pitch. The referee blew his whistle, and the centre-forward kicked off.


This short passage has three separate statements (in the two sentences), each determined by a different action expressed by a verb – __ran, blew__ and __kicked__. There are also three separate ‘doers’ or subjects of the actions: __the players, the referee__ and __the centre-forward__.


### Activity 9


#### Question

Identify the subjects and verbs in the following sentences. Type your answers in the box provided. The first one has been done for you.

1. I like chocolate.

2. The boys ran as fast as they could.

3. Tomorrow my friend and I are going to Paris.

4. She was sitting beside her friend on the bus and they were talking loudly.

5. Chris and Robbie climbed the tree.
 1. Subject: I; Verb: like 
 2. 
 3. 
 4. 
 5. 

#### Answer
<table xmlns:str="http://exslt.org/strings">
<caption></caption>
<tbody>
<tr>
<th>Subject</th>
<th>Verb</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">I</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">like</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">The boys</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">ran</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">They</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">could</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">My friend and I</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">are going</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">She</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">was sitting</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">they</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">were talking</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">Chris and Robbie</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">climbed</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>




---

4.3.2 Subject and object
Sometimes a sentence also contains a noun (or pronoun), indicating to whom or what the action is being done. In the sentence, ‘ __The referee blew his whistle’__, the subject is ‘ __the referee’__, the verb is ‘ __blew’__, and ‘ __his whistle’__ is the thing to which the action is done. This ‘receiver’ of the action is called the ‘object’ of the verb. Another way to think of this is to ask a question of the subject and verb; for example, ‘The referee blew – what?’ The answer to the question, ‘his whistle’, is the object.

Two of the sentences in <a xmlns:str="http://exslt.org/strings" href="">Activity 9</a> above also have objects: ‘I like __chocolate__ ’ and ‘Chris and Robbie climbed __the tree__ ’.


### Activity 10


#### Question

Identify the subject, verb and object in the following sentences. Type your answers in the box provided.

1. The dog fetched the ball.

2. The girls were quietly reading their books.

3. We don’t like hard work.

4. In 60 ce Boudicca destroyed Colchester, London and St Albans.

5. The Romans could not forgive her.

6. People will be watching you.
 1. 
 2. 
 3. 
 4. 
 5. 
 6. 

#### Answer
<table xmlns:str="http://exslt.org/strings">
<caption></caption>
<tbody>
<tr>
<th>Subject</th>
<th>Verb</th>
<th>Object</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">The dog</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">fetched</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">the ball</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">The girls</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">were reading</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">their books</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">We</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">do + like</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">hard work</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">Boudicca</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">destroyed</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">Colchester, London, St Albans</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">The Romans</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">could + forgive</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">her</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">People</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">will be watching</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">you</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>



As you can see from the examples in Activity 10, in English the subject usually comes before the verb and the object after it, so the order of components is __subject–verb–object__ (sometimes shortened to SVO)﻿. This is not always so, however: the object may come first in English, perhaps for the sake of emphasis. And so it is possible to say:

<!--Quote id=-->
>__Hard work__ we don’t like.


Similarly, the verb can sometimes come before the subject in English:

<!--Quote id=-->
>‘Get lost!’ __shouted the man__ angrily.



---

4.3.3 English and Latin: word order and meaning
As the subject–verb–object order is normal in English, the difference between a word as subject and the same word as object is not shown by inflection; this is unnecessary. Some English pronouns form an exception, nevertheless:
<table xmlns:str="http://exslt.org/strings">
<caption>Table 7 English pronouns that change form</caption>
<tbody>
<tr>
<th>__Subject (in the subjective case)__</th>
<th>__Object (in the objective case)__</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">I</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">me</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">he</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">him</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">she</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">her</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">we</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">us</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">they</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">them</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

This change of form is a vital point to bear in mind when learning Latin, because Latin nouns and pronouns (and adjectives) change their form according to whether they are the subject or object in their sentence: it is the form of the word, or ‘case’ as it is usually known, that determines whether it is the subject or the object.

This is a particularly important point, as English usually relies on word order to distinguish between subject and object, as we have already noted: ‘The dog bit the postman’ is in the conventional order of subject–verb–object, but changing the order of words to ‘The postman bit the dog’ substantially alters the meaning of the sentence.

This would not be so in Latin, because the different case-endings on the nouns (etc.) indicate which word is the subject and which the object, even if the order of the words is unexpected: object–subject–verb, for example. All the same, there is a word order in Latin which is more usual than others, and this is subject–object–verb. Because of this, the Latin reader has to wait until the end of the sentence with great anticipation to find out what the action (the verb) is!


## 4.4 Unravelling sentences


In this section you get to practise your skills of analysing English sentences, first by looking at a passage of prose then at poetry.


---

4.4.1 English prose: subjects and objects
In order to consolidate your knowledge so far, you will first practise identifying subjects and objects in the context of a passage of English text.


### Activity 11


#### Question

The following passage is about the Roman emperor Gaius, better known as Caligula.

Read through it and identify as many subjects, verbs and objects as you can. You will note that not all of the verbs in the passage have an object. Type your answers in the box provided.

<!--Quote id=-->
>Gaius deprived the noblest men at Rome of their ancient family emblems – Torquatus lost his golden collar, Cincinnatus lost his lock of hair, and Gnaeus Pompeius lost the surname ‘Great’. He invited King Ptolemy to Rome, welcomed him with appropriate honours, and then suddenly ordered his execution, because, at Ptolemy’s entrance into the amphitheatre during a gladiatorial show, his fine purple cloak had attracted universal admiration. And if Gaius encountered a good-looking man with a fine head of hair – he himself was bald – the back of his scalp was brutally shaved.
>(Suetonius, *The Twelve Caesars*, *Caligula* 35; adapted from the translation by R. Graves)



#### Answer
<table xmlns:str="http://exslt.org/strings">
<caption></caption>
<tbody>
<tr>
<th>Subject</th>
<th>Verb</th>
<th>Object</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">Gaius</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">deprived</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">the [noblest] men</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">Torquatus</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">lost</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">his [golden] collar</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">Cincinnatus</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">lost</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">his lock [of hair]</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">Gnaeus Pompeius</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">lost</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">the surname</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">He</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">invited</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">King Ptolemy</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">(He)</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">welcomed</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">him</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">(He)</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">ordered</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">his execution</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">his [fine purple] cloak</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">had attracted</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">[universal] admiration</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">Gaius</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">encountered</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">a [good-looking] man</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">(He himself)</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">was</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan=""></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">the back [of his scalp]</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">was shaved</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan=""></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>




---

4.4.2 English poetry: subjects and objects
In English prose – as in spoken English – you can normally rely on sentences conforming to the standard word order of subject–object–verb (or simply subject–verb where the sentence doesn’t contain an object). Neither Latin nor English is always so straightforward, however. In English poetry, in particular, it is not uncommon to find language used in experimental or unconventional ways, word order included. Consider the following, for example:

<!--Quote id=-->
>The dark and vicious place where __thee he got__

 Cost him his eyes.* (Shakespeare, *King Lear*, 5.3.171–2)  [link]()



In the three words formatted in bold above, Shakespeare varies the word order from a standard English word order. __Thee__ is the old English objective form of __thou__, and the normal order would be ‘he got [= begot] thee’. Poets, for special effect or to improve the metrical rhythm, often do vary the order. Consider this example from Shakespeare’s Sonnet no. 133:

<!--Quote id=-->
>Me from myself thy cruel eye hath taken* (Shakespeare, Sonnet no. 133, line 5) [link]()



Here we can analyse the sentence to find out the structure:

1. Which is the verb? – ‘hath taken’

2. Who/what has done the action? – ‘thy cruel eye’ (subject)

3. What has been taken? – ‘me’ (object)

Similarly:

* To me fair friend, you never can be old;

* For as you were when first your eye I eyed,

* Such seems your beauty still.
* (Shakespeare, Sonnet no. 104, lines 1–3) [link]()

What is the grammatical structure in ‘when first your eye I eyed’?

1. What is the verb? – ‘eyed’

2. Who/what is doing the action? – ‘I’ (subject)

3. What is being eyed? – ‘your eye’ (object)

This sort of analysis will be important in your study of Latin. But, as it is the case-ending on the Latin noun which indicates whether it is subject or object, it will be easier to sort out which is which in a Latin sentence than it is in some passages of English text.


### Activity 12


#### Question

To make sure you have understood the principles established so far, see if you can pick out the subject, verb and object in the following seven examples. Record your answers in the box provided.

<!--Quote id=--><!--Heading:
            Example 1-->
>Our hearts you see not;* (Shakespeare, *Julius Caesar*, 3.1.170)  [link]()



<!--Quote id=--><!--Heading:
            Example 2-->
>For that security craves great Lucifer* (Marlowe, *Doctor Faustus*, 2.1.36)  [link]()



<!--Quote id=--><!--Heading:
            Example 3-->
>This casket India's glowing gems unlocks* (Pope, *The Rape of the Lock*, 1.133)  [link]()



<!--Quote id=--><!--Heading:
            Example 4-->
>Wit, brav’ry, worth, his lavish tongue bestows* (Johnson, *London*, 126)  [link]()



<!--Quote id=--><!--Heading:
            Example 5-->
>Much he the place admired, the person more.* (Milton, *Paradise Lost*, 9.444)  [link]()



<!--Quote id=--><!--Heading:
            Example 6-->
>Two massy [massive] keys he bore, of metals twain* (Milton, *Lycidas*, 110)  [link]()



<!--Quote id=--><!--Heading:
            Example 7-->
>In Peace the thoughts of War he could remove* (Dryden, *Absalom and Achitophel*, 25)  [link]()


 Example 1: 
 Example 2: 
 Example 3: 
 Example 4: 
 Example 5: 
 Example 6: 
 Example 7: 

#### Answer
<table xmlns:str="http://exslt.org/strings">
<caption></caption>
<tbody>
<tr>
<th>Subject</th>
<th>Verb</th>
<th>Object</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">You</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">see</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">Our hearts</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">great Lucifer</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">craves (for)</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">that security</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">This casket</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">unlocks</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">(India's) glowing gems</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">his lavish tongue</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">bestows</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">wit, brav'ry, worth</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">he</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">admired</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">the place, the person</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">he</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">bore</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">two massy [massive] keys</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">he</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">could remove</td>
<td class="highlight_" rowspan="" colspan="">the thoughts (of War)</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>



