# 10 Trainers for eye and ear


If you search for music theory sites on the internet, you’ll find several that provide interactive drills, often called trainers. These aim to help you improve particular skills that are involved when using staff notation. They are useful for coordinating your eye and your ear, that is, coordinating looking at notation while listening to sounds. Admittedly you need regular practice to make headway with the drills. However, with steady application (and a degree of patience) you will find that, through using these drills, your eye and ear will become much more proficient at identifying different aspects of the music you are looking at and listening to.

Indeed, many aspects of staff notation lend themselves to drills. It is a relatively straightforward process to create drills for note-naming, identifying rhythms, scales, key signatures, intervals, chords and so on. In addition, drills for improving a particular skill can vary in scope. With note-naming, for instance, a drill might ask you to identify notes on the treble staff, or on the bass staff, or both; it might also include notes with ledger lines. A drill for a particular skill can also have different levels of difficulty from which you can choose.


## 10.1 How to use trainers


Before you start to practise a drill you need to become familiar with the various possibilities available. On a website these are sometimes defined in a separate window/web-page called ‘Settings’ (or similar). Once you’ve located this page, and you are sure that the choices you have made will produce the drill that you require, you will have to make a realistic assessment of the level of difficulty that you can cope with. Don’t be over-ambitious! It is better to underestimate your proficiency to start with, otherwise you may well find the drills too difficult and you will soon lose heart.

Even when everything is set up, it might take a little time to become familiar with the way a drill works and how you should respond. Some drills where you are required to enter notes with pitch and rhythmic values on a stave need a little pre-practice. So be prepared to have one or two trial runs just to become ‘at home’ with the drill, before you start in earnest.

Note that the programs that make drills possible on websites are associated with Flash or Java. So you will need Adobe Flash Player and/or the Java Runtime Environment installed on your computer.


## 10.2 Where to find trainers and recommended reading


Websites currently available (2011) that contain drills for eye and ear training include:

1. Ricci Adams' Musictheory.net. [www.musictheory.net](http://www.musictheory.net) which requires Flash;

2. teoría: Music Theory Web [www.teoria.com](http://www.teoria.com) which also requires Flash; and

3. eMusicTheory.com [emusictheory.com](http://emusictheory.com) which requires Java.

Note that these sites and others also provide tutorials on many aspects of staff notation, which you could use to supplement your knowledge, or reinforce what you have learned already. However, as with all websites, it is prudent to compare the information on a few different sites in order to assess the accuracy and reliability of the information found on them.


---



### Recommended reading


---


Rather than the internet, you might like to consult reference material in hard copy. In which case you could try:

Taylor, E. (1989) *The AB Guide to Music Theory, Part I*,**London, Associated Board of the Royal Schools of Music.

The Associated Board also publishes graded workbooks and booklets with model answers. The workbooks for Grades 1–3 would be relevant for this course. You can find a list of these workbooks here: www.abrsm.org/publishing/instrument/46

